So let's discuss reference types value
types and the main differences between
those so far we've seen primitive types
like int double and ball new all the
primitive types are value types in other
words they hold a value now unlike
primitive types an array is a reference
type and string is also a reference type
but we're going to talk more about
string in later videos
so let's now start though by going
through this to make sense of it and we
can just start and why main method that
I've created and by the way I've created
a new project that you can see here in
IntelliJ called references vs. value
types I'm gonna start by a topical code
in the main method int my int value
equals 10 then we're going to do the
second line int another int value equals
my int value okay so I've got two
variables there my int value and another
int value and we've assigned the value
10 to my interfere the my into value
variable and on the next line we're
assigning the value of my into value
which is 10 in this case to another int
value so in other words both variables
now I've got the value of 10 let's just
quickly confirm that or just do a simple
output might value equals plus might
value which is the same for the another
int value so another in family equals
plus another in fali
let's just run that to make sure that it
works I'm course it there's no reason
one that won't work so I've got the
value of 10 there let's put the window
down the bottom move alright so next
what we're going to do let's increment
another in Feli
there you go down there's a line and are
there your printing statements and do
another value another in valley plus
plus and a semicolon let's print out
both valleys again I'll just copy that
and then paste the code in again so
you've got it before and after there or
run the code you can see the second time
that I've run up this time another
invalid with the value 11 and of course
my int value is and is unchanged and
still has the value of 10 so that's not
fairly straightforward and I'm sure that
you understand how that's working given
what we've been through the course so
far so that's value types so when we
created a an int variable this value top
a single space in memory is allocated to
store the value and that variable
directly holds a value now if you'll
sign it to another variable the value is
copied directly and then both variables
work independently as you can see and of
each have their own copy of a specific
value in the case of might value it's 10
and another in value 11 now reference
types like a raised or classes work
differently you have already discussed
what a reference is how it works and the
new operator so whenever you see the new
keyword that means that we're creating a
new object so let's create a new array
and then come to come down here after
the second print house and type int int
array so enter left and right square
braces my int array is equal to new int
and in square brackets 5 semicolon on
the end so this array has got five
elements and we have a variable or in
other words a reference Wyant array now
arrays again are reference types so what
does this mean again all reference types
are used by a reference so we're
reference holds of reference or an
address to the object but not the object
itself so again a reference holds a
reference or an address to the object
but not the object itself so in other
words the variable here my eat array
holds a reference or address to an array
in memory with reference to
we're using a reference to control the
object in memory so we can access the
object directly so a reference is like
an address some of some object in memory
in this case again my int array is
actually a reference to the array in
memory now this might sound a bit
confusing I'm going to show you some
slides in a little while that should
hopefully make things a bit clearer but
let's see what happens if you write
cement some code that was similar to
what we've done with the int so far in
the program what I'm going to do is
create another array here on the next
line int int array again it left or
right square brackets and we'll call
this one another array is equal to Y int
array so what have we done on this line
line 19 well here we're declaring
another reference to the same array in
memory so now we've got two references
pointing to the same array in memory so
in other words both my inter a and
another array hold the same address so
as you can see one way to know it's a
reference type is the new operator
because that creates a new object in
memory and we're using the new operator
on line 18 and we created an array of
five elements on line 18
so basically new here means new object
and the second line we haven't used the
new keyword we've just used the equal
sign you have to print them out we're
going to use a useful static method from
the class arrays which is built into
Java it's a method called to string so
hopefully from the name as I type the
code you'll probably understand what
this will do let's try sorry in double
quotes every equals and I can type plus
a rice dot two string then parenthesis
I'm going to type by int array again
that's a useful command built-in to Java
that will print out the contents of an
entire array so this method to string
which you'll see or frequently as we go
through the course joins multiple
strings or objects into a string using a
comma as a separator so in this case
we've got an array of integers so the to
string method is going to convert every
element in the array to a string and
then return a new string where every
element is separated nicely and we can
print the whole array on one line
so it's pretty useful method and you'll
soon see how nicely it prints out our
array so let's do the same for the
another array variable as well rip that
out another array equals plus it's
arrays dr. string in parentheses is
going to be another array the two right
parentheses to close it off we'll just
run that and you can see that it's
nicely printed at the values we've got
zero because so all we've done is
defined the int in the array they're
initialized cause it's an int to 0 by
default we've also got the same output
for another array there
so let's actually see what happens if we
make a change to one array so I'm going
to come down to the code below here and
I'm going to type another array and in
square brackets 0 equals 1 so 0 in the
square brackets equals 1 semicolon and
let's just take a copy of that line
again paste at it but just to make it
really clear I'm going to change the
text to what after change after change
that way we can see the change hopefully
easily so what do you think is going to
happen at this point will it change just
another array or will it in fact change
both variables well let's run this and
see what happens you can see what's
happened down the bottom left-hand
corner of the screen there both were
actually changed so both variables in
other words again a references to an
array and because we've updated another
array to one it automatically updated
the other array because that's because
both variables are referencing the same
array in memory so there's only one copy
of the array that both variables are
pointing to and that's why the array has
been updated as it has now this might
look a bit weird but that's how
references work and you'll soon see on
the slides that I'm about to bring up on
the screen and it's because reference
types represent the address of the
variable rather than the data itself
so in our case again both variables
represent the address pointing to the
same array in memory so in in effect
we've only got one array in memory that
both are pointing to well so let's check
out those slides to hopefully make
things have been easier to understand
what's going on so here we've got the
same code from IntelliJ when the line
int left right square bracket by array
equals new in five in square brackets
execute the line creates a new array in
memory with five elements and
initializes all elements to zero and
that's because by default numeric arrays
are initialized to zero because they
have type int in this case so now we've
got a reference that points to the array
address in memory and on the image you
can see an arrow from the reference
pointing to the array in memory going to
ray pointing to that array so in the
next line we're creating another
reference to the same array then notice
on the image we've still only got the
one array but we've now got two
references that point to that same array
in memory so in other words to the same
address in memory each reference or
variable has a different name but that
doesn't mean there's two different
arrays you've got two references but
both as you can see clearly point to the
same one array the next two lines while
that is printing up the array to the
console we're printing the same array
again because there's only the one array
in memory every element has the value 0
and that's exactly what's printed out
the next slide another array 0 in square
brackets equals 1 so we're assigning the
value of 1 to the first element of the
array you can see that that in red in
the bottom left-hand corner that puts
the value 1 into the element at index 0
so in other words we're setting the
element at index 0 the first element of
the array to hold the value 1
now since another array and my enter a
are two references pointing to the same
array we could say that both references
can see the change so in other words
we've got one array in memory so
whatever reference to the array we use
the other references are still pointing
to the same address and we're getting
the same output back as a result of
making that change all right so we're
putting out the other last two lines and
again since we're printing the same
array out and since we changed a right
element at index you
to one we see the change for both lines
for the first element in element zero
now showing the value 1 instead of 0 so
both references again see the change
that we made and we get 1 is the first
element in the array in the same
behavior happens when we pass reference
types to methods let's jump back to
IntelliJ to see another example using
methods what I'm going to do now is
close down the run window for now and
we're going to create another method
here and type private static void modify
array in parentheses int at the right
square brackets array then we have an
echo block and what we're going to do is
change the array position the contents
of the array element 0 to a value of 2
so I'm going to stop array with square
brackets 0 right square bracket equals 2
very simple as you can see then what
we're going to do now is call this array
this modifier array method we're going
to type what if I write we're gonna pass
my int array so we're passing a
reference type to the method so in this
case we're using their reference to my
into a so what if it's going to happen
when we pass the reference type to the
method well the address is copied to a
parameter so in other words now we've
got three references to the same array
the parameter is the third reference to
the array and just to confirm that let's
actually print both references after the
modify array method call so I'm just
going to copy and paste the two lines
the pub paste that below the modify
array our changes have to change too
after modify so that's run this and see
what happens you can see what's happened
down there by the output on the bottom
left-hand corner of the screen the first
element in both cases now holds the
value of two and this is because all
references point to the same array we've
just had the one arraign memory still in
this scenario so you may think that a
method can modify a reference itself but
we can only dereference it but let's see
what happens if we do dereference or in
other words reinitialize the array that
we received by our parameter to our
method what we're going to do is in our
modifier a row method after that line
we're going to type array equals new int
just to write square brackets then we're
going to initialize it by using a
left-to-right curly braces you know put
one two three four five so in this case
we're creating a new array so we have to
use the new inter square brackets and
then initialize the array with the
contents in the left-to-right curly
braces now you may think that references
in the main method may enter a and
another array will be able to see this
change but you see that they're not able
to see it because we D referencing the
reference in other words this parameter
is a reference that points now to a
different array since we used a new
keyword so now it points to a new array
with the elements 1 2 3 4 5 to see what
I mean let's run this so you can see in
the case of my entering another array
they've still got the values to which
was set on line 39 again the reason for
that is because the parameter reference
the one that has the name array points
nearer to a different array once we use
the equal sign we're effectively
dereferencing that reference and an
array has been created in a new area of
memory than array points to however I
enter a and another array are still
referencing the original array and
nothing's changed they're still pointing
to that original array now the same
would be if we change the other array so
let's just see one more example before
finishing this video with dereferencing
so just before they modify array method
call up here I'm going to change the
another array let's try and do that so
another array equals new int that's the
right square braces then we're going to
put the values there 4 5 6 7 8
so now we're creating a new object in
memory and monterrey and another array
they point now to a different object in
memory so now we've got two references
and two different arrays in memory so
let's run it once more and see what
happens so you can see now we've got
different results here you can see now
that the another array no longer gets to
change from the modifier array method
call because before calling the method
modify array when dereferencing the
another array reference and it Neal
points to a different array in memory
and again the hint for that is the fact
that we used a new keyword again alive
for anyone now this was hard to grasp
try to re-watch the video and play
around with these examples because it's
a very important concept to understand
but once you get it you'll see that it
does make complete sense so that was it
that's reference in value types they
can't be sometimes hard to grasp but
we're going to use references in the
course more often and it'll become
easier over time the more you continue
to work with it let's finish the video
now and move on to the next one.